What is the approximate diameter of the Milky Way in parsecs? + wn + 30000
Which Dwarf planet is closest to the Sun? + ww + ceres
An astronomer uses a telescope to observe a comet approaching the Sun. Its tails are clearly visible. 5 years later it is further from the Sun and is observed again. Explain why the tails are no longer visible. Tick all that apply. + cb + The comet is further from the Sun so Solar Wind has less effect; The Sun is at its maximum cycle do the Solar Wind is reduced; The comet lost material when it passed close to the Sun and so cannot produce as large a tail + 1;3
Describe how material from Mars could become a meteorite of Earth. Tick all that apply. + cb + A large asteroid collided with Mars in the early Solar System; The force was large enough for small rocks to escape Mars' gravity; The debris accreted and was driven towards Earth by the Solar Wind; The Earth passed through the debris and some rocks landed on the ground + 1;2;4
Explain why major moons don't exist close to large planets such a Saturn. Tick all that apply. + cb + Moons close to large planets are pulled down into the planet; Moons close to large planets are ripped apart by tidal forces; For major moons to exist, their own gravitational forces need to be stronger than the planet's tidal forces; A planet's tidal forces increase with distance + 2;3
What is the following statement describing? "The distance within which the gravity of a planet is strong enough to prevent any smaller body from being held together by gravity". + rb + The Roche Limit; The Rip Limit; The Gravitational Limit; The Tidal Limit + 1
Explain why Saturn's moon Titan has an atmosphere, while its other moon Phoebe doesn't. + rb + Titan has a spherical shape while Phoebe has an irregular shape, allowing Titan to have an atmosphere; Titan has a warmer surface temperature than Phoebe so liquids evaporate to form atmospheric gases; Titan is larger so has a larger gravitational pull to trap atmospheric gases; Titan is closer to Saturn and so can take atmospheric gases from the planet + 3
Explain why nuclear fusion occurs in the Sun's core rather than anywhere else in the star. + rb + Very high pressures and temperatures allow protons to get close together enough to fuse; Protons are only found in the Sun's core and so cannot fuse elsewhere; The Sun's core is the least dense region so there is space for nucelar fusion to occur + 1
What is the period of the Solar Sunspot Cycle to the nearest year? + wn + 11
Explain why Sunspots appear dark on the Sun's surface. Tick all that apply. + cb + The Sun rotates at different speeds; Sunspots are areas of strong magnetic fields; Sunspots have reduced convection from gases in the Sun; Sunspots are made up of 2 parts, the Umbra and the Penumbra; Sunspots radiate less than the surrounding Photosphere; Sunspots are relatively cooler regions + 2;3;5;6
How many lightyears are in a parsec (to 2 d.p.)? + ww + 3.26
A nearby star has a parallax angle of 6.7 x10^-6 degrees. Determine the distance to this star to the nearest parsec. + wn + 41
The Moon has Maria and Terrae. Explain how the relative ages of the Maria and Terrae can be determined from Earth. Tick all that apply. + cb + Older rock appears blacker; The Maria are blacker than the Terrae; Older areas of the Moon have more craters; The Terrae have more craters than the Maria; The Terrae are older than the Maria; The Terrae are younger than the Maria + 3;4;5
Explain why there are fewer Maria on the far side of the Moon compared to the near side. Tick all that apply. + cb + The far side of the Moon has a thicker crust than the near side; The far side of the Moon has a thinner crust than the near side; There was less volcanic activity early in the Moon's life on the far side of the Moon than the near side; The radiation and gravity of the Sun affects the thickness of the Moon's crust; The tidal forces of the Earth affect the thickness of the Moon's crust + 1;3;5
An astronomer takes a photograph of the Moon to determine the height of the Appenine Mountain range. They take the photograph when the Moon is at First Quarter. Explain why the astronomer has chosen this time to take the photograph. Tick all that apply. + cb + The Sun is shining at an angle on the Moon; The Sun casts light all over the Moon; The Appenine Mountains are far from the Terminator; The Appenine Mountains are close to the Terminator; The Sun is low on the horizon; A shadow is cast by the mountains; No shadow is cast by the mountains + 1;4;5;6
Explain why the observed physical properties of Red Giants require them to have a large surface area. + rb + Red Giants are very luminous but cool stars. Cool stars are usually dim so Red Giants must have a large surface area to compensate for the low temperature.; Red Giants are bright hot stars. Hot stars with small surface areas appear blue and white, while hot stars with large surface areas appear red. Red Giants appear red so must have a large surface area.; Red Giants appear relatively larger than other stars in the night sky, thus they must be bigger and so have a large surface area. + 1
Star X is a low mass star. Star Y is a high mass star. Compare the Evolutionary Paths for the two stars. Tick all that apply. + cb + Star X and Star Y will stay on the Main Sequence for the same amount of time; Star Y will stay on the Main Sequence for longer than Star X; Star X will become a Red Giant; Star Y will become a Blue Giant; Star X will end as a White Dwarf; Star Y will end as a Neutron Star or Black Hole + 3;5;6
The colour of a star is subjective unless the Starlight is sent through a... + ww + spectroscope
Tick all of the details about a star that can be determined from its spectrum. +cb + Radial Velocity; Temperature; Chemical Composition; Stellar Density + 1;2;3;4
One line in the spectrum from a distant galaxy has a wavelength of 510 nm. The same line in a reference spectrum has a wavelength of 490 nm. Calculate the radial velocity of the distant galaxy in m/s (to 2 s.f.). + wn + 12000000
Hubble showed that relationship between a galaxy's velocity and its distance from the Earth is... + ww + linear
A galaxy is moving away from Earth at 20,000 km/s. The Hubble constant is 68 km/s/Mpc. How far is the galaxy from Earth to the nearest Mpc? + wn + 294
Explain the evidence for the Big Bang. Tick all that apply. + cb + The CMBR shows that there is background radiation in all directions, suggesting a single creation event; Theoretical Models predict that Hydrogen and Helium were produced in the ratio 3:1. Observations are in agreement; Black holes show that star evolution lasts roughly 13 billion years - the approximate age of the universe; We can look back in time to see a dense early universe + 1;2
A star has an Apparent and Absolute Magnitude of 1. How far away is it in parsecs? + ww + 10
A star has an Apparent Magnitude of 12 and is 2000 pc away. Calculate the Absolute Magnitude of the star (to 1 d.p.). + ww + 0.5
Tick all of the advantages of connecting radio telescopes together as an array. + cb + It gives a higher resolution; It can detect weaker sources of radio waves; It enables greater collaboration between astronomers; It is easier to maintain and repair an array of radio telesopes + 1;2;3
To create an image, a refracting telescope uses... + rb + a single curved mirror; a series of flat and curved mirrors; a series of lenses; a series of lenses and curved mirrors + 3
A telescope with magnification x23 has an objective lens with a focal length 92cm. What is the focal length of the eyepiece to the nearest cm? + wn + 4
Where are Telescopes detecting x-rays are found? Tick all that apply. + On high mountains; On planes and balloons; At sea level; In Space + 4
Where are Telescopes detecting IR are found? Tick all that apply. + On high mountains; On planes and balloons; At sea level; In Space + 1;2
An astronomer wants to buy a telescope to take photographs of Messier objects. They can buy 1 of 2 telescopes: A) a telescopes with 30 arcmin of view and 15 cm aperture or B) a telescope with 150 arcmin of view and 15 cm aperture. They can also choose to buy the add-ons of an Electric Drive to track celestial objects, an App to automatically position telescopes and a Finderscope which is an additional telescope with a wider field of view. Evaluate which telescope and add-ons would be most appropriate for the astronomer to buy. Tick all that apply. + cb + Messier objects are dim and so need a large aperture to produce a bright image; Messier objects are bright and so do need require a large aperture to produce a bright image; Messier objects are often small points so do not need large field of view to be observed; Messier objects are often diffuse so need a large field of view to be fully observed; Messier objects are hard to find with the naked eye so the App would be useful; Messier objects are hard to find with the naked eye so the Finderscope would be useful; It is important that Messier objects are tracked over a period of time for taking photographs, so the Electric Drive is needed; The astronomer should buy telescope A; The astronomer should buy telescope B + 1;4;7;9
A student uses a camera to time-exposure photograph the stars around Polaris. Evaluate ways to improve the observation in order to take an accurate value for the length of the Sidereal Day. + img +polarisphoto.jpg+ cb + Take the image where the sky is not partially covered so that Polaris can be seen; Photograph would be improved if taken away from flight paths of planes; Take the photograph closer to dusk or dawn for better contrast; Take photograph with clean lens to remove blur; A shorter exposure should be used for more accurate results; A longer exposure should be used for more accurate results; The photograph should be taken further from the equator so that the Pole Star would be higher in the sky; The photograph should be taken closer to the equator so that the Pole Star would be higher in the sky + 1;2;4;6;7
